---
layout: post
title: "EPONYMS"
author: 刘锴昭
---

In this article, I introduce several eponyms.  

# protean

: of or resembling Proteus in having a varied nature or ability to assume different forms

来自Proteus，希腊神话中的一个早期海神，荷马所称的“海洋老人”之一。有预知未来的能力，但他经常变化外形使人无法捉到他：他只向逮到他的人预言未来。

Proteus was the original master of disguise. According to Greek mythology, the grizzled old shepherd of Poseidon's sea creatures possessed the gift of prophecy but didn't like to share his knowledge. Proteus would escape those who wanted to question him by changing his shape. The only way to get a straight answer from him was to sneak up behind him during his midday nap and hold onto him (while he frantically changed from shape to shape) until he eventually revealed what he knew. The adjective protean describes anyone or anything that is as mutable and adaptable as the mythological sea-shepherd.



# chimera

: an illusion or fabrication of the mind

: an individual, organ, or part consisting of tissues of diverse genetic constitution

来自Chimera，是古希腊神话中的怪物，本义是希腊语“母山羊”的意思。它拥有狮子的头，山羊的身躯，和一条蟒蛇组成的尾巴。

In Greek mythology, the Chimera was a fearsome, fire-breathing monster with a lion's head, a goat's body, and a dragon's tail. She terrorized the people of Lycia until their king, Iobates, asked the hero Bellerophon to slay her. Iobates had an ulterior motive; his son-in-law wanted Bellerophon killed and the king was sure the Chimera would do the job. But Bellerophon called in Pegasus, the winged horse, and brought the Chimera down from above. The beast lived on in people's imaginations, and English speakers adopted her name for any similarly grotesque monster, or, later, for anything fanciful.



# chronicle

: a historical account of events arranged in order of time usually without analysis or interpretation

来自Chronos，古希腊俄耳甫斯教的时间之神。但也可能与泰坦神王Kronos有关。chrono-作为前缀的意思就是time。



# iridescence

: a lustrous rainbowlike play of color caused by differential refraction of light waves (as from an oil slick, soap bubble, or fish scales) that tends to change as the angle of view changes

: a lustrous or attractive quality or effect

来自Iris，希腊神话中彩虹的化身和诸神的使者。



# laconic

: using or involving the use of a minimum of words : concise to the point of seeming rude or mysterious

We’ll keep it brief. Laconia was an ancient country in southern Greece. Its capital city was Sparta, and the Spartans were famous for their terseness of speech. Laconic comes to us by way of Latin from Greek Lakōnikos, meaning “native of Laconia.” In current use, laconic means “terse” or “concise to the point of seeming rude or mysterious,” and thus recalls the Spartans’ taciturnity.



# lethargic

: of, relating to, or characterized by laziness or lack of energy : feeling or affected by lethargy : sluggish

: indifferent, apathetic

Lethe, 希腊神话冥府五条河流之一。遗忘之河，亡魂须饮此河之水以忘掉人间事。

In Greek mythology, Lethe was the name of a river in the underworld that was also called "the River of Unmindfulness" or "the River of Forgetfulness." Legend held that when someone died, he or she was given a drink of water from the river Lethe to forget all about his or her past life. Eventually this act of forgetting came to be associated with feelings of sluggishness, inactivity, or indifference. The name of the river and the word lethargic, as well as the related noun lethargy, all derive from lēthē, Greek for "forgetfulness."



# stygian 

: extremely dark, gloomy, or forbidding

Styx, 希腊神话冥府五条河流之一。悔恨之河，分隔地府与人间的主要河流。古希腊人因为这条河神圣，常以此河立誓，诸神以此河立誓而违反誓约者将九年无法说话。

Stygian comes to us (by way of Latin stygius and Greek stygios) from Styx, the name of the principal river in Hades, the underworld of the dead in Greek mythology. This is the river over which Charon the boatman was said to ferry the spirits of the dead; the Greeks and Romans would place a coin in the mouth or hand of the deceased to serve as fare. It is also the river by which the gods swore their most binding oaths, according to the epics of Homer. English speakers have been using stygian to mean "of or relating to the river Styx" since the early 16th century. From there the meaning broadened to describe things that are as dark, dreary, and menacing as one might imagine Hades and the river Styx to be.



# tantalize

: to tease or torment by or as if by presenting something desirable to the view but continually keeping it out of reach

Tantalus，Zeus之子。向凡人透露神间秘密而被打入地狱。

Pity poor King Tantalus of Lydia. The mythic monarch offended the ancient Greek gods. As punishment, according to Homer's Odyssey, he was plunged up to his chin in water in Hades, where he had to stand beneath overhanging boughs of a tree heavily laden with ripe, juicy fruit. But though he was always hungry and thirsty, Tantalus could neither drink the water nor eat the fruit. Anytime he moved to get them, they would retreat from his reach. Our word tantalize is taken from the name of the eternally tormented king.



# procrustean

: marked by arbitrary often ruthless disregard of individual differences or special circumstances

Procrustes was one of many villains defeated by the Greek hero Theseus. According to Greek mythology, Procrustes was a robber who killed his victims in a most cruel and unusual way. He made them lie on an iron bed and would force them to fit the bed by cutting off the parts that hung off the ends or by stretching those people who were too short. Something Procrustean, therefore, takes no account of individual differences but cruelly and mercilessly makes everything the same. And a "procrustean bed" is a scheme or pattern into which someone or something is arbitrarily forced.



# pyrrhic

: achieved at excessive cost

also : costly to the point of negating or outweighing expected benefits

来自Pyrrhus, king of Epirus who sustained heavy losses in defeating the Romans



# halcyon

: characterized by happiness, great success, and prosperity : golden 
—often used to describe an idyllic time in the past that is remembered as better than today
: calm, peaceful 
: prosperous, affluent
Halcyon has drifted along contentedly in English for centuries, but it hatched from a tumultuous story. According to Greek mythology, Alkyone, the daughter of the god of the winds, became so distraught over her husband Ceyx’s death at sea that she threw herself into the ocean to join him. The gods were moved by the couple’s love, and took pity on them by turning them into halcyon birds, a bird identified with the kingfisher. (Kingfishers are known for plunging into water after prey.) According to the legend, the birds built their nests on the sea, which so charmed Alkyone’s father that he created a period of unusual calm that lasted until the birds' eggs hatched. Our word halcyon reflects the story in multiple ways. When halcyon was first used in English in the 14th century it was as a noun referring to the mythical bird, and later to actual kingfishers as well. Adjective use developed in the 16th century and now most often evokes those calm waters—the word typically describes an idyllic time in the past.



# quixotic

: foolishly impractical especially in the pursuit of ideals
especially : marked by rash lofty romantic ideas or extravagantly chivalrous action
: capricious, unpredictable
If you guessed that quixotic has something to do with Don Quixote, you're absolutely right. The hero of Miguel de Cervantes' 17th-century Spanish novel El ingenioso hidalgo don Quijote de la Mancha (in English "The Ingenious Hidalgo Don Quixote of La Mancha") didn't change the world by tilting at windmills, but he did leave a linguistic legacy in English. The adjective quixotic is based on his name and has been used to describe unrealistic idealists since at least the early 18th century. The novel has given English other words as well. Dulcinea, the name of Quixote's beloved, has come to mean "mistress" or "sweetheart," and rosinante, which is sometimes used to refer to an old, broken-down horse, comes from the name of the hero's less-than-gallant steed, Rocinante.



# quisling

: traitor, collaborator

Vidkun Quisling was a Norwegian army officer who in 1933 founded Norway's fascist party. In December 1939, he met with Adolf Hitler and urged him to occupy Norway. Following the German invasion of April 1940, Quisling served as a figurehead in the puppet government set up by the German occupation forces, and his linguistic fate was sealed. Before the end of 1940, quisling was being used generically in English to refer to any traitor. Winston Churchill, George Orwell, and H. G. Wells used it in their wartime writings. Quisling lived to see his name thus immortalized, but not much longer. He was executed for treason soon after the liberation of Norway in 1945.



# Pollyanna

: a person characterized by irrepressible optimism and a tendency to find good in everything

Pollyanna, heroine of the novel Pollyanna (1913) by Eleanor Porter American fiction writer





