---
layout: post
title: "Even"
author: 刘锴昭
---

t is well-known that 'even' as an adverb indicates intensification. Let us look at the following example：

Consolidating a memory is not instantaneous or even _____: every memory must be encoded and moved from short-term to long-term storage, and some of these memories are, for whatever reason, more vividly imprinted than others.

A. salutary

B. deliberate

C. sequential

D. momentary

E. inevitable






<details>
<summary>
点击查看答案 
</summary>

The answer is E. Both D and E are OK if we consider to strengthen 'instantaneous' for the appearance of 'even'. However, the last part of this sentence tells us not all memories are vividly imprinted, in other words, are consolidated. Therefore, consolidating a memory is not inevitable.

</details>






\
Here is another example.



Many of the mid-1980s studies of the interaction between solar wind and the cometary ionosphere represent scientific noise rather than true advances, since the haste in interpreting the data frequently led to_____or even erroneous results. 

A. misleading

B. artificial 

C. trivial 

D. unexpected 

E. surprising

F. superficial




<details>
<summary>
点击查看答案 
</summary>

We should weaken 'erroneous'. 'Misleading' is almost identical to erroneous, and 'artifical' also indicates erroneous. So the answer is CF, which significantly weakens 'erroneous'.


</details>


\
Another example:



Behavior dubbed reprehensible by the residents of the region is considered conventional, even ______ by those of the neighboring region; fortunately, people traveling between the two are resigned to this disparity.

A. eccentric

B. compulsory

C. innovative

D. unconscionable

E. transparent



<details>
<summary>
点击查看答案 
</summary>


'Even' indicates the answer should strengthen 'conventional', that is, the behavior is traditional. So the answer is B.
Who thought it reprehensible? The residents of the region. Who thought it conventional, even compulsory? The residents of the neighboring region. Therefore there is a disparity.
</details>




